.\"                                                              -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2017-2023  Joachim Wiberg <troglobit@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.a
.Dd Jun 3, 2023
.Dt ssdp-scan 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ssdp-scan
.Nd Scan for SSDP capable devices on attached networks
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl hj
.Op Fl l Ar LEVEL
.Op Fl t Ar SEC
.Op Ar IFACE Op Ar IFACE Op Ar ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a tool for scanning for Simple Service Discovery Protocol (SSDP)
capable devices on attached networks.  It sends
.Cm M-SEARCH *
to
.Cm 239.255.255.250
to continuously update a list of SSDP hosts.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following command line options are available:
.Bl -tag -width "-l LEVEL "
.It Fl h
Show program help text.
.It Fl j
JSON output, best used with
.Fl t Ar SEC
option.
.It Fl l Ar LEVEL
Set log level to one of the following, default
.Nm notice :
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width WARNING -compact
.It Cm none
Disable all logging
.It Cm error
Error conditions
.It Cm warning
Warning conditions
.It Cm notice
Normal but significant condition (default)
.It Cm info
Informational
.It Cm debug
Debug-level messages
.El
.Pp
..It Fl t Ar SEC
Timeout and exit after
.Ar SEC
seconds.
.It Op Ar IFACE
By default
.Nm
runs on all IPv4 capable interfaces, except loopback.  If interface
names are given as arguments,
.Nm
will run only on them.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLE
.Bd -literal
$ ssdp-scan -j -t 3
ssdp-scan: Auto-stop in 3 seconds ...
[
  {
    "name": "ReadyNAS Ultra [readynas]",
    "url": "https://192.168.1.171/admin/"
  },
  {
    "name": "readynas: ReadyNAS Ultra 4",
    "url": "http://192.168.1.171:8200/"
  },
  {
    "name": "Kodi (LibreELEC)",
    "url": "http://192.168.1.226:8080/"
  }
]
.Ed
.Sh NOTES
.Nm
is very impatient.  In order to scan for hosts it sends
.Cm M-SEARCH *
messages every other second, which can result in lots of replies, which
in turn causes
.Nm
to retrieve XML files from each replying host.  Be careful.
.Pp
Unless started with the
.Fl t Ar SEC
option,
.Nm
does not terminate on its own.  Instead, it scans continuously until the
user stops it by pressing Ctrl-C.
.Pp
.Nm
does not rely on a local SSDP responder.  It has no dependencies besides
a standard UNIX libc.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssdpd 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
was written by
.An Joachim Wiberg Aq troglobit@gmail.com
to test
.Nm ssdpd
in complex network topologies.  It is modeled on
.Xr mdns-scan 1 .
