.\"                                                              -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 2017-2022  Joachim Wiberg <troglobit@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.a
.Dd Oct 22, 2022
.Dt ssdpd 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ssdpd
.Nd Simple Service Discovery Protocol daemon
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl hnsvw
.Op Fl c Ar FILE
.Op Fl d Ar URL
.Op Fl i Ar SEC
.Op Fl l Ar LEVEL
.Op Fl m Ar NAME
.Op Fl M Ar URL
.Op Fl p Ar URL
.Op Fl r Ar SEC
.Op Fl R Ar NUM
.Op Fl t Ar TTL
.Io Fl u Ar UUID
.Op Ar IFACE Op Ar IFACE Op Ar ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Simple Service Discovery Protocol daemon (SSDP) for networked Linux
devices.  Useful for small and embedded systems that want to announce
themselves to UPnP capable systems, e.g. Windows.
.Pp
.Nm
is a stand-alone UNIX daemon with no external dependencies but the
standard C library.  It has a built-in web server for serving the UPnP
XML description which Windows use to present the icon, by default an
.Cm InternetGatewayDevice
is announced.
.Pp
On Linux systems,
.Nm
reads
.Pa /etc/os-release ,
or
.Pa /etc/lsb-release ,
in that order to determine the distribution name and version, which
along with the system hostname, is periodically transmitted in SSDP
multicast discovery frames.  If neither file exists a built-in default
is used as server string.  On non-Linux systems the information from
.Xr uname 1
is used, since that is the canonical UNIX location for such information.
.Pp
Each SSDP capable device on a LAN has its own UUID.  This is generated
the first time
.Nm
is started and stored in
.Pa /var/lib/misc/ssdpd.cache ,
on *BSD systems it is stored in
.Pa /var/db/ssdpd.cache .
Note, depending on your system this directory may be wiped on reboot, so
.Nm
may start up with a different UUID every time.  Use
.Fl c Ar FILE
to work around that.
.Pp
As soon as the UUID is saved or read from the cache file, and the PID
file has been created,
.Nm
drops any root privileges it may have beeen started with.  The preferred
user to drop to is
.Cm ssdp ,
but if that is not set up in the system, user
.Cm nobody
is used as a fallback.  In the event that user is also missing,
.Nm
will log a warning and continue running as
.Cm root .
.Sh OPTIONS
The following command line options are available:
.Bl -tag -width "-l LEVEL "
.It Fl c Ar FILE
When started as non-root it is usually not possible to write files in
the
.Pa /var/lib/misc/ ,
or
.Pa /var/db/ ,
directory.  Use this option to specify the full path to an alternate
cache file where
.Nm
can store and/or read the UUID.
.It Fl d Ar URL
Override the UPnP description URL in SSDP announcement messages and
replies, default:
.Lk http://%s:1901/description.xml .
.Pp
A single '%s' modifier is allowed, which is replaced by the interface's
IP address.  Example:
.Lk https://%s:5000/rootDesc.xml
.It Fl h
Show program help text
.It Fl i Ar SEC
SSDP notify interval (30-900), default 300 sec
.It Fl l Ar LEVEL
Set log level to one of the following, default
.Nm notice :
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width WARNING -compact
.It Cm none
Disable all logging
.It Cm error
Error conditions
.It Cm warning
Warning conditions
.It Cm notice
Normal but significant condition (default)
.It Cm info
Informational
.It Cm debug
Debug-level messages
.El
.Pp
.It Fl n
Run in foreground, do not daemonize by default
.It Fl m Ar NAME
Override
.Cm manufacturer
in
.Pa description.xml .
.It Fl M Ar UIRL
Override
.Cm manufacturerURL
in
.Pa description.xml .
.It Fl p Ar URL
Override
.Cm presentationURL
in
.Pa description.xml .
This is usually the URL to access the device's web interface.  Default:
.Lk http://%s/
.Pp
In the UPnP spec. this can be an absolute or relative URL, but the
default
.Pa description.xml
does not have the
.Cm <URLBase>
option set.  See the
.Fl d
option for overriding the UPnP presentation URL entirely to support a
relative
.Cm presentationURL.
.Pp
A single '%s' modifier is allowed, which is replaced by the interface's
IP address.  Example:
.Lk https://%s:8080/index.php
.It Fl r Ar SEC
Interface refresh interval (5-1800), default 600 sec
.It Fl R Ar NUM
Initial number of retries to get a valid SSDP discovery socket when
starting up, default 3.
.Pp
When starting up the system may not yet have any interface up with a
valid IP address.  By default,
.Nm
retries 3 times, using a hard-coded 10 sec refresh interval, before
reverting to the regular refresh interval,
.Fl r .
.It Fl s
Use syslog, default unless running in foreground,
.Fl n .
.It Fl t Ar TTL
TTL for multicast frames, default 2, according to the UPnP Device
Architecture (UDA)
.It Fl u Ar UUID
Custom UUID to use.  By default,
.Nm
generates a UUID when starting up the first time.  That UUID is
cached between restarts in the file
.Pa /var/lib/misc/ssdpd.cache .
When this option is given, the built-in UUID generator is disabled and
the cache file is not used.
.It Fl v
Show program version
.It Fl w
Disable built-in micro HTTP server on port 1901.  Use this when
you want to use another (more capable) web server to provide the
.Pa description.xml
file that clients request to read the IP address and, optionally,
custom icon for your device.  See below for an example of how the
.Pa description.xml
file can look.
.It Op Ar IFACE
By default
.Nm
runs on all IPv4 capable interfaces, except loopback.  If interface
names are given as arguments,
.Nm
will run only on them.  Interfaces are refreshed at runtime, so if
an interface given on the command line does not exist at first,
.Nm
will add them later.
.El
.Sh WEB SERVER
The built-in micro HTTP server runs on port 1901 (base SSDP port + 1).
Its only purpose is to serve the file
.Pa description.xml
that clients request after receiving the SSDP announcement frames.  The
default XML file looks like this:
.Pp
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<root xmlns="urn:schemas-upnp-org:device-1-0">
 <specVersion>
   <major>1</major>
   <minor>0</minor>
 </specVersion>
 <device>
  <deviceType>urn:schemas-upnp-org:device:InternetGatewayDevice:1</deviceType>
  <friendlyName>HOSTNAME</friendlyName>
  <manufacturer>Troglobit Software Systems</manufacturer>
  <manufacturerURL>https://troglobit.com</manufacturerURL>
  <modelName>Generic</modelName>
  <UDN>uuid:12345678-coff-eede-adbe-ff00-123456654321</UDN>
  <presentationURL>http://1.2.3.4/description.xml</presentationURL>
 </device>
</root>
.Ed
.Pp
When
.Nm
is started with the
.Fl w
option it is imperative that the
.Fl u Ar UUID
is also provided.  Otherwise clients wil detect a mismatch in the
advertised UUID and the XML file.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /var/lib/misc/ssdpd.cache -compact
.It Pa /run/ssdpd.pid
PID file, created as soon as all setup is complete
.It Pa /etc/os-release
Linux standard base release information.  Primarily used to figure out
distribution name and release version
.It Pa /etc/lsb-release
If
.Pa /etc/os-release
does not exist,
.Nm
falls back to query this non-standard file for information on the
distribution name and release version
.It Pa /var/lib/misc/ssdpd.cache
Cached UUID (Linux), may be wiped by the system on reboot
.It Pa /var/db/ssdpd.cache
Cached UUID (*BSD), may be wiped by the system on reboot
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ssdp-scan 1
.Xr avahi-daemon 8
.Xr lldpd 8
.Pp
.Lk http://upnp.org/specs/arch/UPnP-arch-DeviceArchitecture-v1.0.pdf UPnP Device Architecture (UDA)
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Joachim Wiberg Aq troglobit@gmail.com
